Newsletter: An engineer's guide to talking to users (#8302)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/newsletter/talk-to-users.md

---
title: An engineer's guide to talking to users
date: 2024-04-18
author:
  - ian-vanagas
featuredImage: >-
  https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/posthog.com/contents/images/newsletter/beyond-10x-engineer/super-hog.png
featuredImageType: full
tags:
  - Engineering
  - Product engineers
crosspost:
  - Product engineers
  - Blog
---

> Talk to users? Isn't that a job for founders, product managers, user researchers, and salespeople? Why do would an engineer ever want or need to do it?

Reviewer: maybe to avoid the three ??? something more like

Why would an engineer ever need to talk to users? That's a job for founders, product managers, user researchers, and salespeople. Right? Wrong.

In his book...

In his book [*Modern Software Engineering*](https://www.davefarley.net/?p=352), Dave Farley writes that mastering software engineering requires becoming an expert in learning. When learning is prioritized, talking to users becomes a critical part of an engineer's toolkit.

> To explain further why this is the case, and to help you get started, we wrote this guide based on what we've learned talking to users as engineers ourselves at PostHog.

Reviewer: Maybe more like...

So that begs the question: how should engineers be talking to users? Fret not, we've assembled an essential guide that covers everything you need to know.

## Why should engineers talk to users?

Engineers' biggest pushback against talking to users is that it is a waste of time. This belief is a symptom of the wrong priorities.

> Many engineers place shipping code above all else. Anything that gets in thwe way of this is a waste of time. This is reflected in common metrics measuring engineering success like lead time or deployment frequency. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many engineers place shipping code above all else. Anything that gets in thwe way of this is, apparently, a waste of time. This is reflected in common metrics for measuring engineering success like lead time or deployment frequency. 
```

> This creates a disregard for shipping the *right* code: features users value. Studies show this is more common than you might think. For example, [Microsoft](https://ai.stanford.edu/~ronnyk/ExPThinkWeek2009Public.pdf) found that **only one-third** of ideas tested improved metrics they were designed for.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This creates a disregard for shipping the right code: features users value. Studies show this is more common than you might think. For example, [Microsoft](https://ai.stanford.edu/~ronnyk/ExPThinkWeek2009Public.pdf) found that only one-third of ideas tested improved metrics they were designed for.
```

Reviewer: the words themselves add the emphasis, we don't need to bold and italicize

> A fix for this is spending more time learning what users want. Nothing beats doing this yourself directly. By doing this, you gain the knowledge to that closes the gap between what users value and what you are building.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A fix for this is spending more time learning what users want. And nothing beats doing this yourself. This will also help you close the gap between what users value and what you are building.
```

![Don't build the wrong features](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1713470851/posthog.com/contents/images/newsletter/talk-to-users/features.jpg)

> ## Finding users to talk with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Finding users to talk to
```

> Just because we convinced you that talking to users isn't a waste of time does not mean we want to waste your time doing so. We realize engineers are busy, but that isn't an excuse to not talk to users. As Farley writes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just because we convinced you that talking to users isn't a waste of time doesn't mean we want to waste your time doing so. We realize engineers are busy, but that isn't an excuse to not talk to users. As Farley writes:
```

Reviewer: i think we want to use contractions more often than not, stylistically

> Modern teams fight with schedule pressure, quality, and maintainability of their designs. They often struggle to identify the ideas that really land with users, and they fail to allow themselves the time to learn about the problem domain, the technology, and the opportunities to get something great into production.

> The lucky for you, you don't need a lot of users. This doesn't require a statistically significant sample. A few user interviews can be all you need to clarify the next increment of progress.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lucky for you, you don't need a lot of users. This doesn't require a statistically significant sample. A few user interviews can be all you need to clarify the next increment of progress.
```

Reviewer: what does the 'this' in 'This doesn't require a statistically significant...' refer to?

Second, you don't need to go send cold emails to find users to speak with. Once you have [product-market fit](https://posthog.com/founders/product-market-fit-game), your current users work perfectly. From our experience, these are the best ways to find them:

- Look at analytics to find power users of related features.
- Ask your sales or customer success teams for potentially interested customers.
- Check support for who is asking or requesting features.
- Your users could also be inside your company. For example, our infrastructure team talks to our product teams to understand their upcoming requirements.

To speed up the time it takes to find users, use a tool like PostHog's [user interview survey](https://posthog.com/tutorials/feedback-interviews-site-apps) or provide an incentive, like a merch code or gift card. 

![Feedback for merch code](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1713470870/posthog.com/contents/images/newsletter/talk-to-users/merch.png)

> ## What NOT to talk about

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What you shouldn't talk about
```

> Ironically enough, information from talking to users comes from **NOT TALKING**. Beyond prioritizing listening, there are some specific areas you should avoid. They include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The best information you'll get from talking to users comes from not talking. Beyond prioritizing listening, there are some specific areas you should avoid. They include:
```

1. **Yourself or your product.** If they are users, they probably know what your product is and what it does.

2. **Your solution.** Resist the urge to explain your features and your thinking. You shouldn't use the time to convince them why your solution is the right one.

> 3. **Their solutions.** Users likely recommendations and feature requests. These often don't solve their underlying problems, so reframe these to dig deeper into the underlying causes.

Reviewer: is there a missing word here?

 _Users likely recommendations and feature requests_

4. **Macroanalysis**. Focus on an individual's specific use case rather than a company or industry one. Outside research can fill this if necessary.  

> ## What to talk about?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What you should talk about
```

Our experience talking to users has revealed two main discussion areas. The first is **problem exploration**. This guides future product decisions, like [what to build next](https://newsletter.posthog.com/p/how-we-decide-what-to-build). Focus on concrete situations by asking questions like:

> - How are you solving your problem currently?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- How are you solving your problem right now?
```

- How much would you pay for a solution to your problem?
- What is your workflow for solving this problem? Can you talk me through it?

> The second is **solution validation**. This works best when they are already using your feature or you have a demo to show them. Focus on impressions and problem areas by asking questions like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second is **solution validation**. This works best when someone is already using your feature or you have a demo to show them. Focus on impressions and problem areas by asking questions like:
```

> - Have you tried using X? If not, why?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Have you tried using X? If not, why not?
```

- How are you using X now? What are your touchpoints and workflows with X?
- What is confusing?

> Dive deeper into interesting workflows and lines of thought. Get their preference on options. Ask about constraints. Finally, take notes and [share them with your team](https://posthog.com/product-engineers/interview-snapshot-guide) so they can benefit too (we use an AI transcription tool and keep a master interview document).

Reviewer: what do you mean by 'get their preference on options'?

## Iterating beyond user interviews

> In *Modern Software Engineering*, Farley outlines 5 behaviors engineers need to become experts in learning: iteration, feedback, incrementalism, experimentation, and empiricism. This shows that the process of learning doesn't stop after a few user interviews. Weave the information you get from users to iterate, experiment, progress incrementally, and get feedback again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In *Modern Software Engineering*, Farley outlines five behaviors engineers need to become experts in learning: iteration, feedback, incrementalism, experimentation, and empiricism. This shows that the process of learning doesn't stop after a few user interviews. Weave the information you get from users to iterate, experiment, progress incrementally, and get feedback again.
```

Reviewer: weave it in what regard? with that? not especially clear here

> For example, we often work closely with customers to build features and get feedback via Slack. After user interviews, we build solutions, ask customers about them, and iterate. These customers become references for us, their usage represents broader usage. This helps us spend more time developing features that deliver real value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At PostHog we often work closely with customers to build features and get feedback via Slack. After user interviews, we build solutions, ask customers about them, and iterate. These customers become references for us and their usage represents broader usage. This helps us spend more time developing features that deliver real value.
```

![Feedback via Slack](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1713470870/posthog.com/contents/images/newsletter/talk-to-users/feedback.png)

> A useful metaphor for engineers is that user interviews are like automated tests. Not doing them saves you time, but leads to pain over the long term. Both enable you to iterate faster by providing rapid feedback on if what you've built is working, even if they aren't directly code you ship.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
User interviews are like automated tests. Not doing them saves you time, but also leads to pain over the long term. Both enable you to iterate faster by providing rapid feedback on if what you've built is working, even if they aren't code you ship.
```

> Like your product, your knowledge should be continually improving. Talking to users is one of the best ways to do this. Even if it isn't thought of a tool for software engineers, it should be one for *modern* software engineers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Like your product, your knowledge should be improving all the itme. Talking to users is one of the best ways to do this. Even if it isn't thought of a tool for software engineers, it should be one for modern software engineers.
```

---
title: 8 things engineers should know about talking to users
date: 2024-04-22
author:
  - ian-vanagas
featuredImage: >-
  https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/posthog.com/contents/images/newsletter/beyond-10x-engineer/super-hog.png
featuredImageType: full
tags:
  - Engineering
  - Product engineers
crosspost:
  - Product engineers
  - Blog
---

> Talk to users? Isn't that a job for founders, product managers, and salespeople? Why would an engineer ever want or need to do it?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Talking to users? Isn't that a job for founders, product managers, and salespeople? Why would an engineer ever want or need to do it?
```

In his book *[Modern Software Engineering](https://www.davefarley.net/?p=352)*, Dave Farley writes that mastering software engineering requires becoming an expert in learning. When you prioritize learning, talking to users becomes a critical part of an engineer's toolkit.

> To explain further why this is the case, and to help you get started, we wrote this guide based on what we've learned talking to users as engineers ourselves at PostHog.

Reviewer: how about something like...

That's why you should be talking to users. But what about how? Here are eight essential tips to make sure you get the most out of those conversations.

## 1. Talking to users isn't a waste of time

> Many engineers place shipping code above all else. Anything that gets in the way of this is, apparently, a waste of time. This reflects in common metrics for measuring engineering success like lead time or deployment frequency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A lot of engineers place shipping code above all else. Anything that gets in the way of this is, apparently, a waste of time. This reflects in common metrics for measuring engineering success like lead time or deployment frequency.
```

> This creates a disregard for shipping the right code: features users value. Studies show this is more common than you might think. For example, [Microsoft](https://ai.stanford.edu/~ronnyk/ExPThinkWeek2009Public.pdf) found that only one-third of ideas tested improved metrics they were designed for.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This creates a disregard for shipping the right code and creating features users value. Studies show this is more common than you might think. For example, [Microsoft](https://ai.stanford.edu/~ronnyk/ExPThinkWeek2009Public.pdf) found that only one-third of ideas tested improved metrics they were designed for.
```

> Spending more time learning what users want is a fix for this. This helps close the gap between what users value and what you are building.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Spending more time learning what users want can solve this problem. And it also helps close the gap between what users value and what you are building.
```

![Don't build the wrong features](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1713470851/posthog.com/contents/images/newsletter/talk-to-users/features.jpg)

## 2. You have an information bottleneck

> You might already think you know what users want. Someone spoke to users, turned those insights into tickets, and you to build them. The problem with this is there has been a lot of information lost in the process of going from interviews to tickets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You might already think you know what users want. Someone spoke to users, turned those insights into tickets, and it's on you to build them. Problem is, a lot of information is lost in the process of going from interviews to tickets.
```

![Information bottleneck](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1710055416/posthog.com/contents/images/blog/10x-engineers-do-user-interviews/pm-to-engineer.png)

> As an engineer, you miss out on the context and depth of information users can provide. The person talking to the user likely doesn't know the options and constraints as well as you do. You miss out on being able to dive deeper on those areas and use that information to close in on a good solution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an engineer, you miss out on the context and depth of information users can provide. The person talking to the user likely doesn't know the options and constraints as well as you do. You miss out on being able to dive deeper on those areas and use that information to find a good solution
```

> Think of user interviews like automated tests. Not doing them saves you time, but also leads to pain over the long term. Both enable you to iterate faster by providing rapid feedback on if what you've built is working, even if they aren't code you ship.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Think of user interviews like automated tests. Not doing them saves you time, but also leads to pain over the long term. Both enable you to iterate faster by providing rapid feedback on whether what you've built is working, even if they aren't code you ship.
```

> ## 3. Preparing to talk to users

Reviewer: this applies to all the crossheads, but if the title is '8 things engineers should know about talking to users' then the crossheads need to be those things. so more like

3. You've got to prepare
4. Find the right users to talk to

just little tweaks to how the crossheads are phrased

To make the most out of talking to users, you should know: 

> 1. **Who are your users.** Read "[Defining our ICP is the most important thing we ever did](https://newsletter.posthog.com/p/defining-our-icp-is-the-most-important)" if you don't know.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Who are your users.** Read about how we [defined our ICP](https://newsletter.posthog.com/p/defining-our-icp-is-the-most-important) if you don't know the answer to this.
```

> 2. **How they are using your product (or competitors).** Watch [session replays](https://posthog.com/session-replay) and use analytics to figure out popular features. Analyze competitors for their feature sets and use cases. 

Reviewer: can we lose the parenthesis here?

3. **What you want to build next.** Understand [the significant problems you could work on](https://posthog.com/founders/product-market-fit-game#level-1---find-a-significant-problem-to-work-on) and create a potential roadmap to solve,  but be open to completely changing it.

> Less theoretically, it's also worth it to set up tools that help you automate the process. These could include PostHog's [user interview survey](https://posthog.com/tutorials/feedback-interviews-site-apps#using-surveys-to-book-user-interviews) and Calendly for scheduling, your video conferencing tool of choice, and an AI notetaker like [Superpowered](https://superpowered.me/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should also set up tools that help you automate the process. These could include PostHog's [user interview survey](https://posthog.com/tutorials/feedback-interviews-site-apps#using-surveys-to-book-user-interviews) and Calendly for scheduling, your video conferencing tool of choice, and an AI notetaker like [Superpowered](https://superpowered.me/).
```

## 4. Finding the right users to talk to

> Just because we convinced you that talking to users isn't a waste of time doesn't mean we want to waste your time doing so. Lucky for you, you don't need a lot of users. You don't need to find a statistically significant sample. A few user interviews can be all you need to clarify the next increment of progress.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You don't need to talk to a huge number of users, nor do you need a statistically significant sample. A few user interviews can be all you need to clarify the next increment of progress.
```

- How are you solving your problem right now?
- How often do you do this?
- Why is it important?
- What's challenging about it?

The second is **solution validation**. This works best when someone is already using your feature or you have a demo to show them. Focus on impressions and problem areas by asking questions like:

- Have you tried using X? If not, why not?
- How are you using X now? What are your touch points with X?
- What is confusing?
- Can you show me how you are using X?

For both, **follow-up questions** are critical to get the depth you need to build a good solution. Remember, this is an opportunity to solve your information bottleneck. Do this by asking questions like:

- What do you mean by that?
- Why is that important to you?
- Can you tell me more?

Ask one question at a time. Focus on listening. Get more specific as the interview goes on.

## 6. Common mistakes in user interviews

The best information you'll get from talking to users comes from not talking. Beyond prioritizing listening, there are some specific areas you should avoid. They include:

1. **Yourself or your product.** If they are users, they probably know what your product is and what it does.

> 2. **Your solution or idea.** Resist the urge to explain your thinking. You will bias their answers. Focus on their problems instead. Asking "Would you use this?"  leads to failure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Your solution or idea.** Resist the urge to explain your thinking. You will bias their answers. Focus on their problems instead. Asking "Would you use this?" leads to failure.
```

3. **Their solutions or ideas.** It is their job to tell you about the problem, it is your job to come up with a solution. Their ideas often don't solve their underlying problems, so reframe them to dig deeper into the underlying causes. 

4. **Macroanalysis**. Focus on an individual's specific use case rather than a company or industry one. Outside research can fill this if necessary.

> Any focus other than their problems is a bad one. 

Reviewer: this sentence feels a bit lost?

## 7. What to do after an interview

The first thing you should do after the interview is clean up and [share the notes with your team](https://posthog.com/product-engineers/interview-snapshot-guide). This helps you get more from the work you've done talking to them. We keep all of our user interview notes in a single user interview file (it is currently 378 pages long).

![User interview doc](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1713832564/posthog.com/contents/images/newsletter/talk-to-users/interview-doc.png)

> The second thing to do after the interview is to use it to take action. The great part about being an engineer is that you can just ship small changes yourself. For example, our team often immediately makes small UX changes to clarify a user confusion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second thing to do after the interview is to take action. The great part about being an engineer is that you can just ship small changes yourself. For example, our team often makes small UX changes to clarify a user confusion.
```

For larger product decisions, you can combine qualitative feedback with analytics, experience, product principles, and personal opinions to make decisions about [what to build next](https://newsletter.posthog.com/p/how-we-decide-what-to-build). The experiences of users are one of the most powerful pieces of information for deciding this. 

## 8. Talking to users doesn't stop at user interviews

> Your users are still your users after you talk with them. This means you should still try to build valuable things and get feedback from them after you talk with them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your users are still your users after you talk to them. This means you should still try to build valuable things and get feedback from them after your conversation.
```

> At PostHog, we often work closely with customers to build features and get feedback via Slack. After user interviews, we build solutions, ask customers about them, roll them out via [feature flags](https://posthog.com/feature-flags), and iterate. These customers become references for us and their usage represents broader usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At PostHog, we work closely with customers to build features and get feedback via Slack. After user interviews, we build solutions, ask customers about them, roll them out via [feature flags](https://posthog.com/feature-flags), and iterate. These customers become references for us and their usage represents broader usage.
```

![Feedback via Slack](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1713470870/posthog.com/contents/images/newsletter/talk-to-users/feedback.png)

> By getting more feedback from users, we are better able to ship features users actually want. In the long run, this is a repeatable method to build the best possible product.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By getting more feedback from users, we are better able to ship features they actually want. In the long run, this is a repeatable method to build the best possible product.
```
